*## Equilibrium in goftmoot allocation

The description of giftmoots so far has been of a type of economic travel agent, connecting demand to supply, as community and industry bodies who are experts in their specialist areas, as institutions of trust an anonymity, as investors, and as network nodes in an economic chain from producer to consumer.  Giftmoots replace the signalling function that prices perform in an exchange economy, and by using request and production information, democratic processes, and investment consideration, they use largely the same considerations and processes by actors.  However, one claim of advocates of the exchange economy is that the market is self-regulating against bad faith actors - that is, it has inherent mechanism, through profit-seeking, to overcome the potentially discriminatory behaviour of actors.

The argument is that money is somewhat anonymising, and that an actor who wishes to discrimintate against a particular person or persons - based on, for example, ethnicity or religion - their incentive to increase their exchange capacity will apply pressure for them to deal with every customer.  Empirically, this is not necessarily true, as there are many, and famous, counter-examples.

The giftmoot economy, based on non-reciprocal gifting, is suggestively heavily reliant on good faith behaviour.  I argue, however, that it is not.  First, exchange economies are full of discriminatory behaviour, such as loan and investment rejection, exclusion of ethnicities and minorities from business premises and refusal to serve them as customers, hiring practices that prefer applicants based on ethnicity or gender, and so on.  The exchange economy does not overcome this particular issue with money. In fact, discriminatory behaviour can have financial benefits, where one ethnicity may be attracted to a business because it excludes and discriminates against another.

Second, the motivations for discrimination of this sort are even less in a giftmoot economy.  Hoarding supply provides no benefit to the producer.  For example, denying supply to people of a particular ethnicity is not going to attract more customers of a preferred ethnicity or transform this into greater wealth; it can only attract claims of wastage if there are resources that are not allocated.

There are still some self-regulating mechanisms that exist in the giftmoot economy that provide pressure for a non-discriminatory allocation of resources: labour discernment, and allocation share maximisation.

### Labour discernment

All allocation of resources in a giftmoot economy occurs through unidirectional, non-reciprocal transfer, including labour.  This means that labour, rather than being an exchange, is volunteering.  Moreover, labour receive their means of survival not from their workplace, but as gifts from giftmoots.  This means that labour survival is no longer linked to work and work conditions, freeing up labour to be more discerning about the conditions under which they work.

This means that labour can easily reject work if the conditions are not adequate, including the moral purpose of the work that they are doing.  While in an exchange economy people can be pressured to perform work that they find to some extent morally objectionable by making it a condition of their survival, in a giftmoot economy immoral work can be rejected without a threat to individual survival.  This means that a business which acts in a discriminatory manner will rely on workers who are supportive of that discrimination.  In fact, every resource that the business needs has to be gifted, and without the immediate and specific benefits of exchange, the consideration of allocating resources to the business will be more social and less individual concerns.  Without the “monetary anonymity” of the exchange, a business can only survive in its operations if it behaves within the rationale of the network as a whole.

This is not to say that a discriminatory business will not be able to embed itself within a sympathetic network, because such pervasive networks exist, but it does remove an extra pressure for other producers in the network to provide to causes they are opposed to through self-interest, as well as removing the excuse of monetary anonymity by making the only rationale social interest.

### Allocation share maximisation

The other mechanism that giftmoot networks would use is allocation share maximisation - the desire of each giftmoot to reach the allocation goals.  Giftmoots will strive to reach adequate allocation goals and, if they are not reached regularly, place pressure on producers to increase such allocation, until such time as their needs and wants are sufficiently satisfied.  Producers should allocate in accordance with rational analysis of needs but, even if they do not, the recipient giftmoots have motivation to re-allocated resources to giftmoots who have little or no allocation - even if they have not yet met their overall allocation goals - in order to maximise their shares.

Imagine, for example, a producers giftmoot ( a “goodsmoot”), that needs to allocate units of food to two consumer giftmoots, one of which is requesting a higher allocation per person (a “greedmoot”) and one which is requesting a lower allocation per person (a “thriftmoot”).  Let us say that the greedmoot has 80 people, and the thriftmoot 20, and there are 140 measures of food available overall.  The giftmoots may not know the exact amount of food available - perhaps it varies from week to week, for example - but they have some idea of the average.

Say the greedmoot is asking for 2 measures per person (for a total of 160 measures) and the thriftmoot for 1.2 measures per person (for a total of 24 measures).  The total of the requests is 184 measures, though only 140 are available.  The goodsmoot has a variety of ways to allocate their measures of food but, ideally, they should be responsive to the requests of the giftmoots.

One way to allocate the resources is to fully satisfy the requests of the thriftmoot, allocating 1.2 measures per person for a total of 24 measures, and then allocating the remainder to the thriftmoot, allocating 116 measures to the greedmoot, resulting in 1.45 measures per person.  This satisfies the thriftmoot entirely, and while it does not satisfy the greedmoot completely, it does provide them with more than the average provision of 1.4 measures per person if the food had been distributed across all the people of the giftmoots evenly.

If the goodsmoot allocates first to the greedsmoot, they could provide the entire 140 measures and not satisfy their requests, leaving them with 1.75 measures per person.  This would also leave the thriftmoot with nothing.  But the consequence of this is that the thriftmoot members, having failed to achieve allocation, would migrate to the greedsmoot.  In the next round of allocations, the greedsmoot would then have all 100 people, and the 140 measures would be distributed at 1.4 measures per person - more than the thriftmoot members were originally asking, and less than the greedsmoot members requested.

To maximise their shares across time, the greedsmoot would be motivated to allocate some of their resources to the thriftmoot.  For example, if the greedsmoot were to be allocated all 140 measures of food, it would be beneficial of them to re-allocate 24 measures to the thriftmoot to satisfy its requests, and keep the 116 measures at 1.45 measures per head.  This provides them with a greater measure per person over time than if they had retained all the allocated measures and motivated the thriftmoot members to join them, and they can do so without decreasing the allocation of their own members below that of the thriftmoot.  Therefore, it does not matter whether the goodsmoot attempts to completely satisfy the requests of the thriftsmoot or the greedsmoot first, because the result will likely be the same.