# Problems in an exchange economy

In an exchange economy, for an exchange to occur two parties must agree have sufficient *exchange capacity* (assets, labour, money) to meet the *exchange requirements* (price, product availability and quality).  If two parties can agree on what to exchange and have the capacity and desire to exchange it, the exchange can occur.  Often this exchange is trading resources or labour for money.

Some thinkers like von Mises and Hayek believe that this system of exchanges generates information about the state of the economy to allow people individually, and in the aggregate, to rationally allocate resources to needs.  The prices - and therefore the exchange requirements and exchange capacity - are acting as epistemic signals to communicate information across the network of the conomy.

However, the exchange has some inherent epistemic problems, where signalling is difficult or distortive.  I describe the main epistemic deficits as ‘under-signalling’, ‘counter-signalling’, ‘signal inversion’, and the ‘paradox of efficiency’.

*Under-signalling*

*Under-signalling* I use to describe the circumstance where an actor has insufficient exchange capacity to signal the allocation of resources to their needs.  This can occur when a person has insufficient or no money, no real assets, or no labouring ability.  This circumstance can therefore describe those experiencing poverty, the homeless, and those who cannot labour or who have difficulty labouring, such as the unwell, the very young, the elderly, and even perhaps their carers.  In these circumstances, without the savings or assets to exchange for food, medicine, shelter, warmth or the like, these people have no mechanism within the exchange economy to have the appropriate goods allocated to them to satisfy their needs.

However, this does not entail that these people necessarily do not have resources allocated to them in order to satisfy their needs, just that their needs cannot be satisfied by the primary market mechanism of the exchange, which is the mechanism associated by Mises and Hayek with market signalling.  In the next section I expand upon how they receive goods through gift-giving and how their signalling functions through articulated requests and democratic processes.

*Counter-signalling*

*Counter-signalling* I use to describe the tendency for those with increasing exchange capacity to have decreasing unmet needs, and those with increasing unmet needs to have decreasing exchange capacity.  For example, a person who experiences a misfortune may have increased needs: a person whose car breaks down will need to have maintenance performed, a person who experiences illness may need medication and assistance with some ordinary tasks while they recuperate, and a person whose house is destroyed will need to seek shelter while their house is repaired or rebuilt (or they can find different permanent shelter).  Despite having increased needs, these same people often experience decreased exchange capacity, and therefore decreased ability to have those needs met: the person whose car is in disrepair will need to seek alternate transport to get to work (and may have to leave earlier or pay extra), the person who is ill may be unable to attend work, and the person without a house may be without their tools, clothes or other requirements to perform at work.

Conversely, once a person has met all their immediate basic needs of food, shelter, warmth, medicine and the like, they are then able to choose to place any further money into savings, and, if the situation that allowed them to meet their immediate needs continues (such as a successful business or employment), they may continue to accrue savings indefinitely.  This ability to place money into savings reasonably only occurs once immediate needs have been met.  These savings represent increase exchange capacity, because they can be exchanged when desired.

I call this ‘counter-signalling’ because the circumstance describes a divergence of needs and signalling rather than a convergence.  This is the opposite of what might be expected from an immanent epistemic system that signals well - theoretically a well-functioning system should be responsive to increased unmet needs by increasing the signalling capacity of the relevant actors, and respond to the decreased unmet needs of an actor by somewhat reducing their signalling capacity.  However, when exchange capacity is related to signalling capacity, these have a tendency to have a negative correlation rather than a positive one.

*Signal inversion*

*Signal inversion* I use to describe a reversal of the function of the medium of exchange as a ‘means’ to an ‘end’, while resources that could satisfy needs are used instead as the ‘means’ of exchange.  When a resource is acting as a means of exchange or store of value, this may prevent the resource for being used for a productive or consumptive purpose.  For example, if housing is used as an investment vehicle and this pushes the price above what owner-occupiers can afford, there can be a reduction in available supply of housing even though there is not a reduction in the number of houses.   Moreover, investors in housing will have their assets increase in value as long as housing is scarce, and therefore have an incentive to ensure some relative scarcity of the asset.  Consider, for example, the artificial scarcity of diamonds.

One of the potential outcomes of signal inversion is an economic bubble and its subsequent collapse, such as the tulip-bulb bubble, the dot-com bubble, or the 2008 global financial crisis spurred on by the housing bubble.  In these cases the assets were utilised primarily as investment vehicles rather than as end-use commodities.

*Paradox of efficiency*

Finally, the  *paradox of efficiency* is a term I use to describe the tension between labour efficiency and labour exchange capacity, where as labour efficiency increases the same work requires less labour, which reduces the exchange capacity of some actors.  There are multiple possible outcomes of the tension: first, labour and labour organisations may resist the efficiency changes, and second, labour may have to seek new employment.  The assertion of some economic thinkers is that this process frees up labour for other productive purposes, and while this is the case, it is not necessarily true that the labour will migrate to a productive purpose.  To maintain exchange capacity, labour is pressured to work, which means that there is collective pressure to create work regardless of whether the work is productive.  This suggests that not only is some proportion of employment at any one time potentially ‘irrational’ (in that it is an unproductive or unnecessary allocation of labour), but that every efficiency gain must be offset by a labour expansion of some sort, requiring indefinite economic growth.

None of these identified issues are very original or radical, and I give them in this framework not because of their novelty, but to emphasise two points: they are epistemic issues, and they are inherent to the activity of the exchange.  I raise this to note that the argument for market economies in the Economic Calculation Problem of Mises and Hayek, which is ultimately an epistemic argument, has inherent deficits not related to additional factors such as the level and nature of government intervention.  Similarly, the epistemic deficits caused by exchanges are inherent to exchanges, and not to the rationality, sensibilities, motivations or good or bad faith actions of the actors involved.  An ideal market economy filled only with good-faith actors, regardless of how the ideal is envisioned, would exhibit the same epistemic deficits.

Most market economies address these issues to some extent, with an economic activity distinct from the exchange - unidirectional, non-reciprocal gift-giving.