# Non-reciprocal gifting in the exchange economy**

Non-reciprocal gifting as an economic activity is not only already common, but  is necessary and fundamental, and a response to the epistemic deficits of an exchange economy.  Non-reciprocal gifting is prevalent in areas where under-signalling and counter-signalling occur, for example.  There are a few main channels of non-reciprocal gifting that address the epistemic deficits: welfare, charity, intra-family care, and volunteering.

Welfare is a unidirectional transfer of funds by the state on the condition, usually, that the recipient meets some criteria of need, such as unemployed, disabled, studying,  injured, or similar.  Government institutions can also provide access and care, such as emergency department workers administering care to people, which they provide to people who meet the condition of potential (or apparent) unwellness or injury.  Charity is often privately run and coordinates gifts to recipients based upon certain conditions, such as the recipient being homeless, in poverty, suffering from abuse, and in other states of disadvantage.  Intra-community transfers are transfers of resources within a family (such as from a breadwinner to a spouse, or parents to children) or community (such as a teacher to a student), and includes all unpaid care work, which is often a significant percentage of the overall work done within an economy.

In both cases governments and charities gain allocation of resources, and in the cases of private charities, this allocation is made through non-reciprocal gifting.  This implies that there is effective signalling that allows at least some of the unmet needs to be identified, through research, public action, and democracy; in general, the identification of the needs often exceeds the allocation of resources to those needs.  The under-allocation might suggest that those signals do not permeate sufficiently far into a market economy, however.

Intra-community transfers are transfers of resources within a family (such as from a breadwinner to a spouse, or parents to children) or community (such as a teacher to a student), and includes all unpaid care work, which is often a significant percentage of the overall work done within an economy.  Parents feed their children, children look after their elderly parents, friends help each other out, communities feed each other and look after each during times of crisis, teachers put in extra hours for students, and so on.  In a traditional understanding of economics, many of these activities are not “economic” activities, because they do not involve exchanges, money or contracts.  This separates economics into “formal” and “informal” spheres, of which mothers and women have traditionally performed the majority of domestic work.  Some estimates of unpaid care work calculate it at equivalent to 40% to 60% of GDP.

Finally there is also the case of volunteers, not only as members of more formally recognised charities, but also helpers for formal, non-charitable institutions such as for schools fairs, to help build or maintain community centres, and to administer medical care or emergency responses such as firefighters.  Many of these roles are conducted only after meeting rigorous qualifications, and occur in circumstances where the recipient of the care might generally be unable to pay.

The market economy does not have a reliable method of allocating resources to those with unmet needs in circumstances of under-signalling and counter-signalling using the mechanism of the exchange.  This leaves an epistemic gap that undermines the claim of economists such as von Mises and Hayek that exchange-based market economies provide sufficient signalling.  Non-exchange signalling regularly occurs and non-exchange allocation is a regular response, both through private and public channels, which suggests that non-reciprocal gifting is not a secondary economic activity that occurs in parallel to the primary economy, but a fundamental economic activity that forms part of the primary economy.

The exchange inherently produces a set of epistemic deficits and one resolution is that non-reciprocal gifting can address these deficits to “complete” the economy.  However, the ambition of a giftmoot economy is that non-reciprocal gifting replace the functions of the exchange completely, removing the epistemic deficits as a structural feature.