# Giftmoots as democratic

Democracy is already at work in the exchange economy as an allocation process for non-reciprocal gifting; for example, many smaller charities and volunteer networks use some form of democracy, many community groups make decisions using democracy and, most significantly, state grants and welfare are decided through democratic processes and institutions.  Democracy is an excellent candidate for an epistemic framework for the giftmoot: it advocates equality, which helps ensure signalling is not malapportioned, it provides rights that set minimum standards to work from, it promotes transparency which enables strong signalling, and it acts as a knowledge-producing system, which uncovers needs that cannot be individually determined or articulated.

*Democracy as equality*

One of the fundamental principles of democracy is equality, though the details can vary from theory to theory: equality of rights (for Locke), equality under the law, equality of justice (for Rawls), equality of political participation (for Dahl), equality of the vote, or equality of voices, discourses and worldviews (for Habermas and Dryzek).  For a giftmoot, equality means that members of the giftmoot have equal ability to make requests for their needs, equal say in determining the principles and operation of the giftmoot, and equal claims to rights.

Equal ability to make requests ensures that signalling capacity is maintained for actors regardless of their circumstances.  While exchange capacity could increase and decrease, request capacity would be stable.  When a member has increased needs, they would increase the number or types of their requests, but would not have increased signalling capacity overall.  This is because there isn’t an arbitrarily finite amount of signalling capacity available, and the main constraint is not a limitation on how to signal needs, but a limitation on what needs can be fulfilled and, if there are not enough resources to fulfill all needs, a process of prioritisation of allocation.

A set of prioritisation principles would also be implemented equally, so that there is an “equality under the law” principle for the giftmoot.  That is, prioritisation would not be based on personal connections or the subjective judgement of a few, but on the basis of collectively agreed-upon principles of prioritisation which treat members equally and anonymously, in the same manner that a vote is anonymous.

*Democracy as rights-defining*

Of course,it is perhaps insufficient that needs are signalled equally, because some needs are more critical and immediate than others, such as survival needs like food and medicine.  Democratic frameworks are also useful here, because they propose that some things are more fundamental than others - that is, there are pre-requisites to democracy that need to be met for a regime to be considered a democracy, and so articulates rights that protect those pre-requisites.  These pre-requisites vary depending on the theory of democracy, but often include the rights to speech, fair trials, movement and association.  In most traditional cases the rights are “negative rights” - things that the government cannot do to its citizens.  However, there are also conceptualisations of positive rights and positive liberties, where it is encumbent upon society in some manner to ensure the provision of certain conditions.

There has been an increase in theories that promote positive rights, including in areas of security, healthcare, economic stability, education, and basic quality of life, including access to food and shelter.  These rights are less about the protection of the citizen from the government, as negative rights are, but more about an obligation of the government to ensure the welfare of citizens.

Giftmoots can operate under similar conceptions of negative and positive rights, though, as they are not taking the role of the state, the manner and content of the rights should differ.  For example, the giftmoot is a type of “financial” institution and not a institution of legal justice, so the right to a trial need not be part of the suite of rights incorporated into the giftmoot.  As a giftmoot deals with coordinating resource requests and allocations, the rights needed to be exercised in the giftmoot are the right to request, the right to basic allocation, and the right to vote.

The right to request ensures that signalling can occur - without it, the epistemic function of the giftmoot is undermined.  People must be able to articulate their needs rather than being silenced.  The right to request must therefore ensure that no member can be denied the ability to have their request heard and taken seriously (and, with the principle of equality, taken as seriously as all other requests).  Under this right, there cannot be members whose membership prevents them from making requests, or conditions that are placed on them that prevent them from making a request when others are able to.  This is not dissimilar to a bank having to treat with every customer who has an account, rather than selectively turning some customers away (based on age, ethnicity, or so forth).

The right to basic allocation is a positive right to ensure the welfare of each member of the giftmoot, such as food, shelter, warmth, medicine, and the like; things required for a dignified quality of life, participation in society and participation in the giftmoot.  While not all requests to the giftmoot will be equal, and not all people will make an equal number of requests, the right to basic allocation will ensure that certain types of requests are prioritised.  As to what constitutes an essential allocation, this is a question that the giftmoot will uncover through deliberative processes, producing an intersubjective result within the giftmoot, but which may vary between giftmoots.  

This variance between giftmoots is critical, and here draws from concepts of associative democracy by theorists such as Paul Hirst.  Hirst (1996) conceives of associative democracy as a third way between “liberal individualism and socialist collectivism”, working through a “decentralized economy based on non-capitalist principles of cooperation and mutuality”.  Associationalism is largely based on conceptions of voluntary self-governance of political or economic affairs, or both.  What defines associationalism, and what makes it pertinent to giftmoots, is the focus on local, specalised and focused self-knowledge, being largely critical of centralised government institutions as too far removed from citizens to ensure responsive and relevant representation.  States need voluntary self-governing associations, according to Hirst, to ensure expertise within particular domains “whether territorial or functional” (Hirst, 1996).  That is, different groups have different needs the self-knowledge to identify what these are and how they should be attended to, and so universal rules and standards from a centralised authority produce worse epistemic outcomes than more plural, small-scale associations.

While the general concept of basic rights might be agreed upon, their exact execution is unlikely to be universally conceptualised in the same way, with different people framing the line between basic needs and optional luxuries in different places and for varied reasons.  For example, some might consider entertainment a right, and others a luxury; certain foods might be considered luxury foods rather than essentials, or different giftmoots might have different reasons to place limits on requests (for example, a smaller giftmoot might close during business hours, while a larger one might take emergency requests after hours).

Because there is no objective answer to the scope of rights - or, at the very least, because there is unlikely to be an objective argument that reaches a consensus - an intersubjective, collectively-determined scope is preferable: one where member-input is equal, where participation is consent-forming and legitimating, and where collective decision-making ensures protections against administrative corruption.  That is, members can be satisfied that the definition of rights is generally considered fair by collective determination, rather than hijacked by an elite or defined by a minority.  This style of legitimacy through deliberation is proposed by Habermas () and other deliberative theorists such as Dryzek (), who note that smaller-scale, non-partisan and potentially face-to-face deliberations produce more rational and consensus-generating results than larger, partisan debates.

*Democracy as transparency and accountability*

Transparency is paramount to a working democracy - it allows for corruption to be identified, removed or prevented, and it allows for participants to make informed decisions.  As the function of the giftmoot is for economic epistemic capacity, transparency is required.  Members should be aware of policy decisions, administrative decisions, request type and volume, and available resources.  If members are to decide on reasonable interpretations of allocation rights and investment conditions, information on these matters will need to be regularly reported, available upon request and able to be scrutinised.

Transparency of requests, network connections, request fulfilments and request denials will help members of the giftmoot understand the state of supply and therefore affect the manner in which they form demand, and allow the network connections of producers to understand the current state of demand and determine if they need to change production so that supply can match.

Accountability, alternatively, can ensure that the administration of the giftmoot is responsible and responsive, allowing members to vote in or out administrators, or vote on principles of operation.  For example, if a giftmoot is set up for a special purpose - such as to give voice to a minority or focus on a particular industry - it may be valuable to have overall operating principles that guide the purpose of the giftmoot.  Similarly, leadership roles should be filled with people that the members of the giftmoot trust to adhere to those principles, and who can remove leaders if they do not.

*Democracy as knowledge-producing*

Finally, democracy itself is an epistemic system.  Democracies are locations where people’s ideas aggregate and interact, leading to deliberation that clarifies social concepts and from which new social needs emerge.

Theorists such as Habermas and Dryzek propose that rational, open and honest deliberation where people come together to reason and with an openness to being swayed by reason, will produce new knowledge that contains an understanding built from multiple interests and worldviews.  Such a process of deliberation or series of processes can have a transformative effect; some members will understand the circumstances and needs of others when previously they were unaware of them, while others will be convinced by reasoning that they have not previously fully engaged with.  When different interests are brought together an understanding can be built regarding what is common between them or why they differ, sometimes pointing to a new conceptualisation or cause of the issue that had not previously been uncovered.  Each member is a repository of information about personal circumstances and life experience - when this information is aggregated it can reveal new social needs, new solutions or new opportunities.

In combination with the idea of associative democracy, giftmoots would be centres of specialised and localised demand-knowledge production which would be created deliberatively instead of aggregatively - that is, the demand-knowledge would not “merely” be the sum of individual demands, but also include newly generated types of demands that could not be discovered by addition.