# Giftmoots as financial institutions

Just as banks and other financial institutions exist in the exchange economy not just to coordinate signalling but also to make considerations of capital allocation and service the transactions of clients, so would giftmoots assume the same role in a giftmoot economy.

## Giftmoots as investors

As democratic links in supply-demand networks, giftmoots are also well-placed to make investment decisions.  One of their roles would be to replace the capital market and assist in directing capital towards specific business goals.

Investors in an exchange economy make certain considerations before they will commit: What benefits will they receive? Are their social benefits or problems from the investment?  Does the actor asking for investment have a strong business-plan and appear capable of carrying it out?  In an exchange economy one of the benefits for investors is increased exchange capacity - that is, return on investment.  The consideration of social benefit or detriment might be more limited: some investors will, for example, not invest in fossil-fuel projects, or not invest in gambling or other industries they see as immoral or exploitative.  However, not all investors have such motivations.  The potential for increase exchange capacity might be considered more important, and allow the investor to invest in something even if they believe it produces a problem for society, such as investing in the tobacco industry.  Money as an investment mechanism potentially “anonymises” the moral considerations of the invstment.

The capability of the potential businessperson is another factor in calculating potential return on investment.  An actor with a business plan that outlines customer demand, supply requirements, timeframes, labour and so forth will inspire more confidence in an investor than an actor with a general idea but no specifics.  The investors are therefore the adjudicators of whether a business plan is reasonable or unreasonable, and are required to do due diligence to ensure that they are not investing in a plan that is without substance or merit.

A giftmoot would operate largely the same way.  They would be the gatekeepers of capital, not because they owned the resources themselves (in the same manner that a capital fund does not own the resources, but the exchange capacity to aquire them), but because they have network connections to the resources.  They would ask the same questions about benefits to themselves, society and the veracity of the business plan.  However, there would now be strong overlap between personal and social benefit, and profit would not be part of the calculus.  Instead, giftmoots would look at the potential benefits for their members as the personal benefit evaluation, and benefits for society beyond their members for social benefits.  These can come into competition, for example, investing in a factory that produces for local demand but the pollution of which is a detriment to the environment in general, or the environment of those downriver or downwind in particular.

Giftmoots would also be interested in a business plan that works, because it would be indicative of whether the venture would be successful.  A successful venture will obviously return the desired benefits, but it would also provide integrity for the giftmoot as a discerning and reasonable investment organisation, increasing its likelihood of future resource allocations for future investments.

## Giftmoots as institutions of trust and anonymity

This leads on to another function of giftmoots as institutions of trust and anonymity.  In general, actors need trust to have resources allocated to them, while they need anonymity in order not to be discriminated against for either historical or identity-related reasons.  As a type of aggregating institution, giftmoots can afford anonymity to their members while generating trust through their institutional behaviours and principles.

When a giftmoot considers the business plan for potential investment, they are discerning, in part, how trustworthy the plan and the actor behind it are.  They want to back reasonable, beneficial and successful plans.  Similarly, when the giftmoot reaches out to their network connections to obtain the resources, they will largely be prioritised on the basis of trust - that they have reasonable scrutinised the plan and the benefits.  If the project is successful, the reputation of the giftmoot would increase, but if it is not successful, the giftmoot might be seen as an institution that does not know how to judge viability and then may have more trouble obtaining resources in the future.

However, if reputation is the basis for allocation, then poor history would effectively prevent an actor from gaining future opportunities and allocation.  A person who had a terrible business plan might have such a poor reputation that they find it impossible to have a second chance.  A person who has a poor personal reputation for other reasons might find that a giftmoot doesn’t want to prioritise allocation to them.  History is not the only reason that discrimination might occur - another possibility is identity, where a person might be excluded or deprioritised because of their sexuality, gender, ethnicity, religion or for other reasons.

The giftmoot can address this issue as well, by anonymising its members when they make requests, propose principles and vote on them, produce investment opportunities, and so forth.  As the giftmoot is a middle-man, it can process requests from members without the supplier knowing the exact end-consumer, and without other members of the giftmoot knowing exactly which resources were allocated to whom.  The plurality of giftmoots also allows people to move from giftmoot to giftmoot if they require a fresh start, allowing them opportunities to build up their reputations again.

Anonymity and trust, though in tension with each other, are essential for non-discriminatory but reasonable resource allocation, and allow people to operate privately while also providing clear, publicly available feedback on performance.