# Giftmoots

Like exchanges in an exchange economy, non-reciprocal gifting does not require an institution.  In an exchange economy a customer can pay for a product in cash without the coordination of a bank; the business can even keep the income as cash.  However, coordinated exchanges are ubiquitous, where a payment for a service is routed through a bank or network of banks.  Similarly, a gift can be given with no coordinating institution, and commonly are, such as dinner made for children, care given to elderly relatives, and so forth.  On other occasions, coordinating institutions are utilised, such as charity organisations or volunteer groups.  Coordinating institutions facilitate transfers, including between anonymous actors, over long distances, where transfer is deferred, where aggregate transfers are efficient, and so on.

The coordinating institution I propose here is called the ‘giftmoot’, where ‘moot’ stems from the word connoting a meeting, gathering or democratic assembly.  This is because the nature of the giftmoot I propose is not “merely” coordinating, but democratic, in order to facilitate transparency, equality, knowledge production, rights and accountability.  The giftmoot has the function of receiving requests and sending them on, receiving resources and connecting them to requests, developing knowledge and standards about allocation, acting as institutions of trust, facilitating anonymity, acting as specialist knowledge points, and considering investment opportunities.  The economy would consist of a network of giftmoots, which would compete and collaborate with each other.  Membership would be voluntary, and giftmoots would arise, grow, and fail as they adapted to economic conditions and as economic conditions responded to them.

## Giftmoots as coordinating institutions

The first function of a giftmoot as a coordinating institution is simply to receive requests and receive resources, and then coordinate allocating resources to requests.  In this simplistic model, people would voluntarily join the giftmoot as members who make requests, and voluntarily join the giftmoot as producers who provide resources, and the moot itself would then connect resources to requests.  In a small, closed economy, consisting of a single village that produces enough resources to satisfy at least its basic needs, this model would function relatively well.  It may even become a practical monopoly, and act similar to a centrally coorindated economy, though that would be due to scale rather than inherent design, as there would be no real need for competitors or networks.

Such a design would be useful on a small scale, such as a local community organising resources and labour to clean the streets, open a shop, improve a park, hold a festival or look after local members.  These functions could all be performed in a style that might recall the scale and interpersonal culture of an imagined traditional village.

However, as production becomes more distant and specialised, this simplistic model is less practical; it would require that each giftmoot contain members of every type of relevant production.  Specialisation tends to concentrate types of resources and production, whereas needs are often distributed, so requiring every giftmoot have every type of production would be infeasible.  Instead, therefore, the function of the giftmoot is not to coordinate between members who are consumers and members who are producers, but between members who are consumers and non-members who are producers, similar to a wholesale purchaser then connecting with retail consumers.

Given the increased distance between consumer-members and producers, giftmoots would not just operate in terms of satisfying member requests, but predicting and managing member requests; viewing data from previous request fulfilments and estimating future resource requirements for the next batch of fulfilments.  The giftmoot is a data-processing analytical body that watches production and consumer trends, engages with both sets of actors, sets expectations and manages stock.  It would be encumbent on a giftmoot to be aware of production downturns and manage the expectations of its members, as well as vying to connect with and source alternatives from other producers.  Similarly, it would provide request information to producers to supply feedback on what products are in high demand and which products are not, so that producers can respond.  A giftmoot may stockpile various resources to hedge against downturns, and have strategies to offload stock that is a burden to store when it is unnecessary.

These are not unfamiliar functions; they are the same types of functions that financial institutions perform in an exchange economy.  There are, of course, differences: giftmoots are non-monetary, and don’t pursue profit over resource fulfilment, for example.  Giftmoots, unlike banks and various other financial institutions, would be more beholden to their members through democratic processes, which I will outline below.  The point of this democratic focus is to ensure that giftmoots are held accountable, are transparent, and are responsive, rather than becoming calcified institutions that are ‘too big to fail’ in some sense.

## Giftmoots as networks

Giftmoots are already a network node between consumers and producers, but production and industry networks are currently more complex than this: a single product can have materials and labour sourced from a variety of locations and go through dozens of specialised steps at different companies, before moving through a transport network to retail centres and into the hands of consumers.  These are practical steps.  In a world without the social construct of money, they still need to occur in order for the product to be made and satisfy a need.  Giftmoot networks would be similarly complex and multilayered.  Giftmoots, too, would need to specialise into particular roles to accommodate the particular requirements of different industries, products, needs and logistics.

The result is a need for a variety of giftmoots that cater to particular requirements: those of producers and industry, those of logistics, and those of end-users, including based on locality, community and identity.  For example, industry association giftmoots would subsume the role of industry associations that currently exist to set standards, coordinate functions, develop education and labour, build relevant infrastructure and coordinate and advertise with end-users.  Farmers with needs for specialised equipment, skills and transport could join industry giftmoots that help locate and develop resources to satisfy these needs, including developing training programs, seeking willing labour, coordinating with research for technological innovation and the like.  The giftmoot would not be the company or business, however, who, as a private entity, would express whatever needs it identified and organised itself, its labour and its production process according to its own desires.  The role of the giftmoot would be to network with other producers and resources.  An industry where various producers discerned they had similar requirements would be able to use a giftmoot to create more efficient coordination, rather than each having to make network connections independently.

Similarly, end-consumers would need distribution networks to cater to them, and giftmoots would play a role here as well.  For needs that are relatively broad, giftmoots would inherit many of the functions of a supermarket, bringing together commonly used goods based on the demands of the area and for ease of access of the members.  For more minority needs - perhaps for ethnic groups, the differently-abled, or similar - more specific giftmoots could exist, ones with specialist knowledge of how the needs of their members differ from the broader community norms, informed by the input of their members.

Together, these giftmoots would form a network that parallels the market network.  The market network can be considered as a series of nodes, with each node being a business or institution that provides some function over resources, such as growing or mining them, refining them, packing them, transporting them, combining them with other resources such as in manufacturing or baking, distributing them to wholesalers and retailers and then to the end-consumer.  Resources begin at one node and travel from node to node until they reach their end-point of consumption (or, perhaps, indefinite storage or waste).  Tracking the path of a resource through the market network would draw a series of lines between the relevant set of nodes, slowly converging together until they reach the consumer.  In the giftmoot network, the same process would be followed - a similar, or sometimes even identical, set of nodes and set of connections tracing a path from producer-nodes to consumer-nodes.  The fundamental difference is that in the market network each of these connections between nodes represents an exchange, where the resources tend to flow from the producer to the consumer, and money tends to flow from the consumer to the producer.  In the giftmoot network, the same or similar series of connections would exist, but they would be unidirectional - a flow of resources from producers to consumers.

This picture, obviously, omits that when multiple series of resources are tracked together loops begin to emerge, so that the flow of money in a market network is not unidirectional, as there is a flow of labour into production, and so forth.  Similarly, the flow of resources in a giftmoot network would not be unidirectional, as labour would flow towards producers and, of course, all labour and all producers are consumers.  But each individual connection would be a unidirectional connection.

The market network does not connect every resource node to every potential need node.  Instead, resources are allocated towards nodes that meet exchange requirements, such as being able to pay the price, and the claim made by Mises and Hayek is that the development of connections and dead-ends between nodes is a rational allocation based on price-information.  The giftmoot network would also not necessarily allocate resources from each resource node to every potential need node.  Instead, fulfilment requirements would dictate which nodes are allocated resources and which nodes are not.

The parallels between the market network and the giftmoot network are strong, with the primary differences being the unidirectional transfer of resources from node to node, and the manner in which nodes are prioritised for allocation.  The giftmoot network is still a decentralised economy of decision-makers best informed about their own contexts and specialist knowledge engaging either directly or through networked coordinating institutions in order to achieve their own self-devised goals.  A non-monetary economy does not necessarily have to be centralised in order to function and may, due to epistemic flexibility and variability, function better when it is distributed.

In a non-monetary economy, actors still have to process largely the same information within the network.  For example, an actor wishing to start up a new business venture, such as a bakery, will need to source flour, ovens, premises, labour, and so on.  This is the same in an exchange economy, where they might ask investors for money, or a giftmoot economy, when they might ask a giftmoot to use its network connections to help them.  Money doesn’t create a shortcut for an actor determining their requirements and where they might come from.  The difference is that in a monetary economy, the price will indicate whether those resources are in low supply or high demand already - whether they been, according to Mises and Hayek, already been put to good use.  However, a giftmoot network response will also return this same information: the potential baker will approach a giftmoot, who will consider the business plan, who will then send the requests up through the network chain, with more considerations at each step.  If the resources are scarce and being put to use, these considerations will deprioritise sending the signal further up the chain towards producers, and if the resources are abundant then the consideration will be less thorough and the signal will reach through the network quickly and easily.