# What is a gift?

There’s a lot of literature on gifts, non-reciprocal gifting and non-reciprocal gifting economies.  In most cases in the literature, gifts are seen as a type of special exchange, one where either the giver receives something intangible as a benefit in return (such as reputation or influence), or where their gift places an obligation on the recipient to provide something in return at a later date, though with no precise determination of the value or timeframe.

The theory of a giftmoot economy, however, treats the term a little differently: a gift is a voluntary, one-way, non-reciprocal transfer of resources.  That is, a gift places no obligation whatsoever on the recipient, and a gift isn’t given in order to receive an intangible benefit.  A gift is given because the recipient has requested it and the giver feels that they are able to supply it.

A gift is a transfer between two private parties.  The giver is not obligated to give the gift, nor the receiver to receive it.

*Conditions on gifts*

As non-reciprocal gifting is voluntary, the giver can place essentially any requirements on providing a gift, though it may be sensible to consider some more intuitive and likely than others.  While one portion of exchange requirements is usually denominated as a value of some medium of exchange, gift fulfilment requirements are potentially more varied, and can relate to the conditions of the recipient, the interest of the giver, and the evaluation of trust between them.

*Request*

The first thing a giver might instate as a requirement is that the recipient (or potential recipient) meet some basic condition.  If the condition is not met, the gift is not given.  Gift-givers can choose under what conditions they voluntarily transfer resources.  The most basic condition that a gift-giver might consider is whether the recipient is requesting the gift.  This premise might be so obvious that it does not need stating, but it does provide the primary basis for gift allocation and ensure the function of the request: that gifts are given to willing, requesting recipients.  Just as an exchange requires both actors to want to participate in an exchange because of the desire for the things being exchanged, so do gift-givers participate because of a match between request and gift.

*Need*

Another type of basic condition, and a more restrictive one, is that the recipient meet some condition relating to the need for the gift.  Again, in many cases, this might be intuitive.  For example, if a person requests a textbook, the giver may provide the book on the basis that the person is a student enrolled in a course.  This is not to say that a giver might not provide a textbook to others, but, in circumstances where resources are restricted checking if the recipient meets some relevant condition is an option that a gift-giver has.  This is something that also occurs with exchanges; for example, some trades only occur between registered groups who have proven proficiency in various areas, such as safe use of the product or material.

*Interest*

The next type of fulfilment requirement that a gift-giver might apply is whether giving the gift satisfies their interests in some manner.  That is, a person who produces books may gift them out on the basis that they are to be read, but not on the basis that they are to be burnt.  In their consideration, burning books may be immoral, or a poor use of a scarce resource, or non-preferable for some other reason.  This is not dissimilar from the interests that drive exchanges already: an advertising firm may not run ads on white nationalist sites, or accept ads from white nationalists, even if the other party meets the monetary exchange requirements.

*General interest*

Exchanges also provide a general interest - an increase in exchange capacity. For many actors in many exchanges, this is perhaps the primary or only consideration.  Having a generalised interest may simplify the considerations that an actor has to make, roughly “anonymising” the interest that they have.  Non-reciprocal gifting has a similar generalised interest: diffuse or generalised reciprocity, where the overall social benefits of the gift will provide non-specific and non-individualised benefits to the giver.  For example, a gift of food will perhaps feed someone who works on their favourite television show, or works in a hospital, and even though the giver may not be able see the exact impact, that they live in a healthy and functioning society is an ongoing benefit.

*Trust*

The third and final fulfilment requirement a giver could apply is trust.  The person who gives the book to a recipient on the basis that it is for reading may only do so if they trust that the recipient is likely to read it and not, for example, burn it.  This is important with recurring gifts, such as continually providing flour to a bakery on the trust that they will use it to create bread, or medicine to a hospital with the trust that it will be dispensed safely and appropriately.  Again, exchanges also require trust to be carried out: loans can be denied to people considered unlikely to pay them back, and employment can be rejected if the person is not considered trustworthy enough to behave appropriately within the business.  Merchants need to trust that the customer’s payment will successfully be transferred, and customers that shipped orders will be sent out.  However, exchanges have a clear mechanism to deal with trust - that the reciprocal transfer is, in many cases, virtually instant and verifiable.  This more immediate type of trust is not necessarily relevant to non-reciprocal gifting, because there is no signalling capacity reduction from a transfer that goes poorly.

Other types of trust include qualifications and institutions.  Institutions build reputations over time, have internal practices and procedures, vetting, and accountability measures (where, for example, members can be expelled), while qualifications indicate a level of expertise and dedication.  These types of trust, too, show up in the exchange economy, with personal relationships and institutional reputations the basis of many business deals, and some exchanges only permitted between qualified actors who understand the risk management involved.

*Comparison with exchanges*

The fulfilment requirements of non-reciprocal gifting are therefore not too different from those of exchanges: the actors must meet certain basic conditions, it must be to the actors’ interests, and there are standards of trust involved, without which the transfer does not take place.

It is essential to reinforce the distinction between the gift and the exchange.  In non-reciprocal gifting, the giver receives no specific benefit or reciprocity from the recipient, neither material, abstract or intangible.  If a fulfilment requirement provides such a benefit in a specific and individual manner, the threshold between gift and exchange has been crossed.  So, even though a giver may assess the condition of the giver as part of the fulfilment requirements, the condition cannot be that the recipient provides the giver a material good, defined instrument of abstract value, some intangible benefit, or some obligation, whether formally binding or not, to provide some such in the future.  The condition of non-reciprocal gifting cannot be that the recipient provides food, labour, entertainment, information, a promise, or even a hand-shake and a thankyou.  That is not to say that the recipient *cannot* say “thank you” and the giver *cannot* expect it, but it cannot be an obligation placed on the recipient without which the gift would not be given.  The recipient being in the condition of being hungry or being enrolled in a course are conditions that relate to the recipient’s, not the giver’s needs.

Similarly, a gift cannot be taken back.  If the giver provides the gift on the basis that the recipient meet certain conditions, meet certain interests and is trustworthy, that does not imply that the giving can be compulsorily reversed if the conditions, interests and trust are not met.  This is a fundamental distinction that separates gift and exchange.  A book given to be read and not burnt cannot be compulsorily re-acquired if the recipient then states that it is their intention to burn the book; otherwise the gift is a transaction where the giver places an obligation on the recipient in return for the book, and therefore constitutes an exchange.  Because no obligation can be placed on the recipient in return for resources, there is no recourse if the recipient violates trust, except that the giver can note the untrustworthiness of the recipient and use this in consideration next time the same recipient makes a request.